tonight's guest is seymour hersh
prize-winning author and journalist
investigative journalist who's written
for the new york times and written a
number of books from the my lai massacre
to his recent book on the Korean
Airlines flight double-oh-seven
to tonight's topic the iran-contra
affair mr. Hirsch has made it a career
out of finding the truth behind the
headlines and now without further ado
I'd like to present mr. Seymour Hersh
this is so weird I'm so far back but
that's the way it is apparently but we
get closer to the mic squeals somebody
said as best as I can I think I'll just
try and tell you what's on my mind and
we'll do some questions and I should say
that I'm actually in the middle of a
book not so much on the iran-contra
affair but on the foreign policy of
Reagan and as such I have a lot of ideas
on the press and its role in society
since I which I'm qualified to talk
about and basically I've been following
the issue very close at before I begin I
want to say to those of you who haven't
caught up with the news tonight that it
is true that the White House announced I
guess late this afternoon that the 82nd
airborne and a battalion of Marines have
successfully invaded Luxembourg and it
will be going ashore at Monaco tomorrow
it's my little funny way of talking a
little bit about sort of beginning by
talking about another issue that's very
interesting obviously Grenada some of
you might remember their famous Grenada
invasion of 1983 which was subsequent
we proved I guess basically that no
nation with a population of fewer than
400,000 is safe from American democracy
I don't know what else we proved it was
an amazing experience
if you think about it Grenadiers
population is 110,000 roughly the size
that of the Rose Bowl that many people
fit into the Rose Bowl once a year and
son-of-a-gun we beat him was a great
victory and maybe the students that we
were told were in peril maybe they
really weren't in peril but that was a
minor fact maybe there really wasn't
2,000 Cuban armed to the teeth Cuban
warriors there but that's the
I the fact maybe it took the 82nd
airborne something like four days to go
three miles but that was beside the fact
what happened is we accept it
very jingoistic Lee and I think the
American press are those squealing and
yelling about not being included in the
battle plans basically behaved
I guess there's any press would and in
any country at war even horrors tan xub
the Yugoslavia press agency or toss the
Soviet press agency out I would say that
it's very hard to differentiate the
great American democratic free press
from some of the mouthpiece press when
it comes to something like Grenada in
which an incident in which the president
United States said that met every
standard of international law because
we've been asked in by other countries
in the Eastern Caribbean sort of the
rule of law Faust by the president and
explaining the invasion was that you had
asked you to beat up you and that's okay
well this is gonna be very very tough on
Grenada and the underpinnings of it and
the whole story isn't in what I'm saying
I guess is my way of looking at the
Reagan administration he's a little
different I don't focus on iran-contra
my own instinct is that what went wrong
in this government probably went wrong
very early probably as soon as they got
into office that seems to be the pattern
people tend to behave in a consistent
way that his administration's do they
don't change their colors very often and
I think I think if let me just postulate
this to you if Robert McFarlane and I'm
assuming some level of not in knowledge
about the iran-contra affair McFarlane
was the former national security adviser
they've been asked to go back in by by
the President to John Poindexter then
the national security adviser to go to
Tehran last year and in Tehran he was
going to negotiate trade some weapons
he flew in from Israel traits and
weapons for some hostages that were held
by various factions Shiite factions in
Beirut over which we believe the
Iranians had a lot of control one of the
immediate hitches of course was as is
that as McFarlane discovered the
Iranians were basically rug traders and
when he got there they told them right
away that they wanted more weapons if
they were going to produce some hostages
I guess we really didn't get down to you
know if you give us 30 more weapons
we'll give you two legs or two arms when
you get that close to that but it was a
lot of rough trading a lot of rough
talking but I wonder what would happen
and it precipitated McCart McFarlane
left the thing fell apart eventually a
newspaper in Beirut told us about it
and that's how we first learned I wonder
what would happen if McFarland had made
it supposed to be gone in there and
they'd asked for more weapons or suppose
they were more satisfied with the
weapons we gave and we didn't give him
the best we had the towel mr. steel W
missiles we gave them we're not the most
sophisticated there's other more
sophisticated level of missions of
missiles that we did not give the
Iranians and I'm sure they knew it I
suppose MacFarlane had been successful
it's my belief that he probably would
have the plane called for him to come
back to Washington with the hostages
suppose three or four people were indeed
did pop out of Beirut he would have gone
to Washington that would have been a
ceremony in the White House lon and
maybe the Ayatollah would have been
praised in the sky for his cooperation
maybe it would have been mention but the
bottom line is it would have gone down I
think it would have gone down very
easily if he had made if he had gotten
it back and even indicated the Iranians
had helped I think all of us would not
have looked since we're such a country
of getting things done I think all of us
would have now not have looked very far
much further we would have settled we
had immediate success we got our
hostages back and that would have made
most of us happy and the underlying
problem that we were negotiating in
effect in secret against their policy
running the policy in secret totally
diametrically opposed to our public
policy I think what would've been much
of a player well in all of this there's
some interesting things for me as
somebody who's been in Washington for
two
mostly and somebody has been reading and
watching presidents for a long time
I think basically we're up the creek in
our country in terms of what we and the
press can do for you I think there's
been a lot of misunderstanding about our
role how good we are how bad we are
whether were the messengers of whether
the public's tired of the affair or not
I think the issue transcends the press
immediately the problem in this country
and it gets down to some of the basic
things we want from a president we
expect from the president the stand as
we hold them to and I think if you go
back I'll go back just as far as the
Cold War it's my belief that since the
advent of the Cold War and the notion
that American policy was fueled an
anti-soviet ism anti Russian policy not
necessarily anti-communism policy
because we can live with the Communists
in China and elsewhere on if we have to
anti Soviet style communism I think you
could almost run a skiing a straight
line and the foreign policy of all of
our presidents I don't think the foreign
policy of any president basically from
Truman on down has been significantly
different the core of the policy has
always been basically anti-communism
when push when shoved jimmy carter tried
to be a little different in the end he
had his iran caper to I think ultimately
to basic I'm not saying that's not
enormous differences between a Mondale
and a Reagan on social issues or
wherever it's going to be the next
candidate for the Republicans and
Democrats on on all of the issues that I
think are very important to obviously
student loans Oh welfare farm issues but
separating out those the foreign policy
is amazing the uniform and you see a
couple of amazing trends I think one of
them is that we've given our presidents
basically two divine rights in foreign
policy one of them is that the right to
send our sons and daughters pluck them
from our house you send you people into
combat without meeting any of the
constitutional prerequisites and
actually there's there's legislation now
the War Powers Act of
1873 also has another burden on the
president informing Congress getting
their consent in advance we fabricated
that right to the president that's
almost a divine right of the presidency
he can send us anywhere explain it later
whether it's in Grenada or if they have
to go to Iran into Iran the mile hill
just do it and ask questions first or
into Nicaragua he'll do it first and
then come back for the sanction the
second secondary and a sort of obvious
corollary Divine Right is to write the
lie to us about it and I think if you go
back through history you'll find the
American presidency without any blinking
at all on foreign policy have lied to us
Jack Kennedy lied to us about Louis
Richard Nixon all the way we can talk
about him forever Lyndon Johnson about
the initial Vietnam caper the intrusion
our incursion into the Dominican
Republic in 1965 Jimmy Carter had his
Iran Desert won the scandal the flop in
the desert when he tried to rescue the
hostages Oh
Jerry Ford had this mayagez some he
might remember the freight the the group
of American sailors that were seized by
the Cambodian force in 1975 forty-one
Marines were killed trying to free him
after they'd already been freed
we knew they've been freed we still sent
the Marines in some of them to die
because we needed the show of force we
just lost the war in Vietnam Reagan's
had as I said as his Grenada his Marines
in Lebanon why more people aren't angry
at Reagan for killing 241 Marines in
Lebanon is a great mystery to me
in all of this there are some sort of
sad truths one of them is as I said
we're all loyal it's a wonderful country
America is a very unique place it's a
kind of place of which somebody like me
can go around and make a living and be
successful
you know criticizing my government
openly and giving them a lot of grief
and B I'm being taken seriously for it
not being thrown to jail I we all
recognize and appreciate the enormous
freedoms we have however there's some
very I think terribly disturbing trends
in the way we treat our people and our
attitudes towards our people in public
life one obvious thing is as citizens we
do
the government please if you need come
and take our children our sons and
daughters now and send them off in two
basically trained them in the art of
committing mass murder in the name of
democracy and send them off to do it
with our blessing the president has the
right to come and take our children and
put him in the war in return what do we
ask from our presidents and our national
security leaders we all know that our
our own families there's nothing as
important as a child we knew growing up
that you don't lie to mother or father
on serious issues everybody has petit
white lies and as a parent you learned
that one of the things you try not to do
particularly is you truly get others lie
to them manipulative myths of course
absolutely silly and counterproductive
and as you get older and wiser you stop
doing it as a parent just as you stop
doing it as a child we all learn in life
that the only real true happiness comes
with having a partner in life in whom
you have enormous confidence and trust
these are all things that we hold very
dear in our own life our life's cannot
live without them there's nothing unique
or uniquely American or unique that
happens around the world that's normal
and just think about it the same
standards we insist in on our own family
our own personal life we no longer begin
to expect or demand from our national
leaders the notion that we would hold
Ronald Reagan to the same level of
credibility we insist our children my
insist my children on critical issues
hold it's just it's not there it's a
laugh riot
I mean I think that's a reality some of
you may still believe in the Tooth Fairy
and have some illusions about some of
the things mr. Reagan says or does and
he's not a typical of presidents all
presidents will lie to us and have I'm
making that point Reagan's very much in
line with what we've had for 30 or 40
years since the Cold War began and our
expectations has fallen have fallen so
low that the president and the National
Security Advisor can be shown as they
have been to have manipulated and lied
to us repeatedly in the iran-contra
affair for
sure and in many other Affairs I just
wrote a story for the New York Times
magazine a month ago in which I said
like it or don't like it the famous and
bombing raid on Libya that we took part
in our f-111 some England remember that
raid mrs. Thatcher Magra Thatcher was
all upset about it was not really aimed
at anything other than the assassination
of Qaddafi that was a main target for
nine of the planes the mission was to
kill him
and/or his family
both of which he was in a tent either in
a tent or a house a few hundred yards
away
the pilots were instructed that they
were to bomb both the house and in which
he has a children and an adopted child
and target them on the grounds you could
target the family it was a CIA study
done saying that you could target the
family on the grounds that in Bedouin
culture the desert culture a man like
Gaddafi is diminished even more whether
you get him or don't get him if he
cannot protect this family so even if
you kill his children and wife and
children and miss him you've diminished
him in the standing of his countrymen
how such reasoning gets into the White
House isn't really clear I think
anything would have gone I guess by 1986
the bombs fell Qaddafi was missed they
hit his tent but they hit nearest 10th
missed him one of his children an
adopted daughter was killed two of his
children a boy three and a boy four were
critically injured and put in intensive
care for a few weeks all eight of
children were hospitalized along with
his wife I don't know what honor that
does to America to have this go on I
don't know what honor I don't know what
kind of integrity what kind of process
it is to have to do it and of course
cover it in a series of lies as they
have done so I guess what I'm saying is
I think it's we're much further down the
road than some of you might the most
people I think we've been lied to
systematically since the man got no
office about foreign policy I think
we've been lied to about the policy in
South Africa I think we've been lied to
about the policy in the Middle East I
think we've been lied to especially
about the policy in Central America
I think obviously we've been lied to
about the policy in the iran-contra
affair but I think it's deeper I don't
think it's just something that happened
I don't think there was one critical
misjudgment in 1985-86 over Iran I think
it's systemic and endemic and I also
think the last place you're gonna get
the whole story is gonna be from the
press and I think the fact that you
haven't heard it and the press doesn't
tell it to you doesn't mean much because
there's an awful truth that I've come to
I think it's a truth and I think I've
come to understand it I'll tell you
something if the president added States
and his national security liar
I'm not admitted advisor his national
security adviser and his minions lie to
us it's not a natural unnatural mistake
actually if the president and the people
around them lie to the press they can
get away with anything
and I'm gonna give you some evidence
then I'm gonna give you my view of
history or than that in a minute to make
my point but hear me out
I think we in the press are absolutely
helpless if we have a president who's
willing to sustain a lie and a national
security apparatus is willing to go
along with it
we can't penetrate the odds are too hard
against this you cannot believe the
bombshells that are lying out there
folks there have been whole companies of
American Rangers put into combat that we
don't know about yet whether you hear
about it or not whether you can get
enough proof there's an awful lot of
stuff that's going down in this
administration and others too I think
there's been stuff with the Israeli
intelligence service that will be very
troubling to a lot of Americans if it
can get out and how can I demonstrate to
you that in this maze that the press
really is sort of more of a bystander
than a lot of people want to believe our
problem is we've been spoiled but
anybody I can always touch base I used
to talk a lot about the Vietnam wars in
the introduction you heard I did a story
and there was the first reporter to
write about the me line massacre that
was a massacre that took place in 1968
almost 20 years ago in which a army
company was parachuted was helicoptered
into a what was believed to be a heavy
vietnamese combat area and they went
into a village looking for a fight and
they found anywhere from 345 to 576
depending on who's count civilians
men women children mostly old men mostly
women and children gather around cooking
their morning breakfast in the morning
rice about seven o'clock they rounded up
the people put them in three large
groups and machine-gunned them executed
them over about four or five hours
casual raping along the way at one point
they stopped and they had it took a
lunch break and they sat there amidst
the bodies eating sea rations all of
this was observed by officers flying
above them in various patterns the the
air above the operation the task force
was known as task force Barker in the
northern Vietnam at five hundred feet
the battalion commander at fifteen
hundred feet that was the regimental
commander the the one-star division
commander was at two thousand and above
him was the Major General in charge of
everything
all were there all watched of course one
lieutenant got prosecuted for it
Lieutenant William Calley the real
lesson is I started with that and I used
to talk about Vietnam but you can't talk
about you know it's funny I don't on me
when I was growing up in the 40s and 50s
in Chicago World War one was always some
sort of distant Mirage it was Flanders
Fields and fields of poppies and the
poems of Sassoon and a few other things
a few novels and it seems clear now that
for most young people who grew up in the
late 70s and 80s Vietnam was your
Sanders field in your fields of poppies
it's a distant war it's hard to relate
to it but what I think you all can
relate to is Watergate if by none other
than the mechanism of the movies
everybody here has seen all the
president's men right have you on home
box office video anybody not seen all
the president's men Redford Hoffman
Woodward Bernstein you know they'll get
a story about Bob Woodward and Carl
Bernstein Bob Redford and and Dustin
Hoffman played the starring roles about
how they and here's this storyline these
two intrepid reporters nothing I say
should be in any way meant to denigrate
what they did they what they did is
outstanding and they've been
appropriately and rewarded for it is not
enough we can say about him they did
great stuff
however there's the storyline as these
two intrepid reporters find out about
this bad guy Nixon and write a story and
they bring him down great victory for
the press the movie was the big hit sort
of like sort of like an ancient version
of Rambo
you know and enrollment and journalism
school soared everybody got all excited
about journalism is a powerful place a
place to shape things and let me give
you my definition of Watergate in light
of that movie and the perception you
have in light of the notion that the
press actually did in mr. rate mr. Nixon
and my notion has the same sort of
beginning point as I as I would argue
you could begin with Reagan I begin an
inauguration day on January 20 1969
Nixon gets elected some of this is
ancient history for you so bear with me
you won't remember this but it was a
close election he beat Hubert Humphrey
by a few percentage points the Democrat
Vietnam was the critical issue and Nixon
one of his campaign plaques was programs
was planks rather was Nixon said I have
a secret plan to end the war well it
turns out he did after being elected he
decided he was gonna win it which was a
secret plan he was gonna win it and what
he was going to do first is let the
other guys know the North Vietnamese our
enemy
that he was tougher than Lyndon Johnson
and willing to risk more he ordered the
b-52 sleep our Strategic Air Command to
begin bombing Cambodia Cambodia was a
neutral country adjacent to South
Vietnam the North Vietnamese and Viet
communist troops as the Vietcong we call
him would hit us in the south retreat
across the border and hide out there
safe a sanctuary we didn't go across the
border there'd been a lot of calls by
the military to go across the border in
the Johnson era but Johnson basically
acceded to the advice of his Joint
Chiefs of Staff who said in effect you
know mr. president we're not doing so
well in the one war we're in now
the south white take it to another
country so he never did Nixon changed
the rules he wanted to be 52s to begin
bombing the sanctuaries but he didn't
want anybody to know about it
so you authorized double bookkeeping
basically he told these pilots that they
were to bomb Cambodia and report the
bombs inside their own chain of command
as being in South Vietnam Congress was
going to vote funds for bombs that were
going to be fault that we're gonna fall
in Cambodia but Congress was gonna be
told the bombs are falling in South
Vietnam so was everybody else inside the
military chain of command mr. Kissinger
the Secretary of the National Security
Adviser his deputy Al Haig the earths
while candidate he as you know he's
coming here soon I'm sure will be here
within minutes as Mort Sahl said he's
thrown his helmet into the ring that'll
be an interesting candidacy it for sure
anyway hey Kissinger picked targets the
secret bombing began March 16th 1969
Nixon had been in office less than two
months we begin dropping bombs on
Cambodia next 14 months 3630 b-52s go
over Cambodia a hundred and ten thousand
tons of bombs by the way everything I'm
telling you came out in subsequent
investigations it's all empirical data
anybody want to challenge me and I'll
tell you where you can find it the facts
and the various hearings 110,000 tons of
bombs fall in Cambodia in secrecy in May
two months after the secret bombing
began a colleague of mine at the New
York Times bill Beecher writes the story
about increasing pressure on North
Vietnam and accurately says one thing
we've done is had a b-52 plane bombed
Cambodia he doesn't say it's systematic
he doesn't say it's been secretly being
secretly designed by the White House
with the targets picked by Kissinger and
Haig and the president he doesn't say
it's been going on for two months and
it's gonna continue forever but the
White House doesn't know what else he
knows out of this story which made no
impact at all in the in the public
didn't even make the news that night
just another little story in The New
York Times began then a 21 month program
of illegal and unconstitutional
obviously wiretapping 13 members of the
government including people like the
closest aide to the Secretary of State
and the closest aide to the Secretary of
Defense were wiretapped Kissinger zone
staff five six people in his own staff
were wired to have four newsmen among
the Marvin calestous recently was signed
a contract to go to Harvard and head up
some center there then then with CBS for
wiretapped 21 months the taps ran the
February of 71 in secret in May 14
months later 1970s some of you remember
this we invaded Cambodia Nixon
authorized ground troops to go into
Cambodia some of you might remember Kent
State the students were shot and killed
the Kent State the four students by the
National Guard the country went up in
smoke it's hard to believe it now but at
that time we were very politically
involved this country the Vietnam War
was very much on everybody's fingertips
Nixon went on television to talk to us
about it he had an American flag in his
lapel and a portrait of Lincoln behind
him and of course sweat on his brow and
a heavy beard every cliche in a big nose
he's actually very Nixon of all like all
the people it's the most interesting to
me he's so bright and very bright and
very I think evil Nixon tells us that
we've never violated the neutrality of
Cambodia at this point he's put a
hundred and ten thousand tons of bombs
fourteen months of bombs on Cambodia
b-52 bombers and he looks us in the eye
and he says it's the first time we've
ever violated the neutrality I don't
know what's worse his lie or the fact
that he knew he could get away with it
bad summer for Nixon if you remember it
was a terrible summer of anti-war
demonstrations he was worried about
being green Amin ated for the election
for the presidential prep for the
presidency by his own party
according to memoirs he nominates two
candidates for the Supreme Court
Haynesworth and Carswell both get
rejected if you think about it that
almost never happens even ed Meese with
all the questions about his credentials
sailed through the Senate you don't
reject the president's candidate last
one had been
jected was Louis Strauss in the
Eisenhower administration for Secretary
of Commerce he's in big trouble he goes
down a dirty he orders the CIA to go
after a yen day in Chile
he thinks the yen day selection in Chile
Salvadorian the Gosselin's is elected as
a socialist leader of Chile he thinks
that's dangerous
even though every agency tells him
there's no problem he goes after a yen
day he also orders the CIA to begin
operating in secret against American
anti-war students and black students the
CIA's begins a program that would lead
to files I think more than a hundred
thousand doses collected by 1974 when
there was subsequent investigations in
the spring of 71 Daniel Ellsberg
publishes the Pentagon Papers former
Pentagon aid advisor to the Robert
McNamara the White House goes bongo over
this a secret police unit g-chord Liddy
Howard hunt the White House plumbers if
you remember that group is set up
operating out of the White House just
like Oliver North did and John
Poindexter they begin going after
Ellsberg they break into the office of a
cycle analysis and Ken and in Beverly
Hills in September 1971 obviously
looking for evidence that he was linked
to the KGB or what to recruit this to do
the break-in hunt and Liddy hunt out of
the CIA Lydia to the FBI both working
for the White House
go back to old CA hands from the Bay of
Pigs with whom hunted worked hunt was a
longtime operative had been working in
the Bay of Pigs for the CIA five Cuban
Americans are brought out to California
guys by the name of Sturges Gonzales
Barker Martinez and they help plan the
operation it's supposed to be a covert
break-in into the office of the Cyclops
ICO analyst his name is Lewis feely but
of course everything goes wrong they
made in a waxed key but the key didn't
work the building was under guard they
ended up using a crowbar to get into the
window they ended up using a get into
the office and a crowbar to get into the
files and afterwards they realized they
hadn't gone in covertly so they took a
thousand tablet jar of em print tablets
smashed in it threw it around the room
obviously trying to suggest to the
police that a junkie looking for an
emperor in fix came in and had
burglarized the office lord knows why
they did it what I'm telling you was in
public record and a grand jury here
proceeding in
a County grand jury proceeding in la big
deal
some guy gets caught a local black guy
gets busted a couple weeks later for the
break-in and ascent to jail where remain
until after Watergate in the group
disbands in April Nixon and the people
decide they want to get some
intelligence on the White House I mean
on the Democratic National Committee
Larry O'Brien the former Johnson aide
runs in that Sherman National Committee
they have offices in the Watergate
office building they asked Hunt Liddy to
go and do a bug do a wiretap hunt Liddy
turned to the five Cuban Americans again
who trot up this time not to LA but to
Washington they buy equipment they
penetrate the offices in the Watergate
at night they put bugs in to the phones
they're in the offices and they leave go
back home two things wrong with the bug
one it doesn't work for more than a few
weeks and secondly it's in the wrong
office
they're not getting Larry O'Brien but
they're getting a deputy in May 72
Jagger Hoover dies the FBI director
Daniel Ellsberg none other comes to lead
an anti-war demonstration in part to
celebrate his death I presume next-best
Nixon's interpretation the orders action
taken against Ellsberg this comes from
the Watergate prosecutor proceedings
never made public at the time because
Nixon was pardoned if you remember
before they had a chance to prosecute
this fully the v cubed America's Hunt
and Liddy again are called on to do it
their track record being so sterling
everything they've done have been so
were wonderful
they're called again and this time the
Sturgess later tells a federal grand
jury that the orders were not to sort of
kill Ellsberg we just sort of you know
break a leg or beat him up or something
and they start a fight at the rally
where Ellsberg is speaking Sturgess and
Gonzalez and Barker Martinez the Cuban
Americans brought up for the same five
don't get to Ellsberg they fight with
other people if you know Daniels we've
never heard him talk he probably never
even noticed it as he talked to fight
going on you know a few feet belong and
eventually a bunch of people are
arrested and released the next day on
White House somebody comes along with
Secret Service passes and releases him
in June
they decide to do something the
elections coming up in four months about
the the no good no working bug and Larry
O'Brien's phone and they asked John
Mitchell we think the president they
asked hunt and Liddy to go back and put
new bugs in what the lady turned again
to the Cuban Americans they meet at the
Howard Johnson motel and they go in and
while they're in before they get a
chance to penetrate the offices they're
caught by the police some guard has
noticed that a piece of tape on the door
and they're caught and if you think
about it and the whole point of this
story is that's where the movie begins
if some of you saw it it begins with the
break-in okay bear with me when did we
learn about the secret b-52 bombing of
Cambodia which was the fourth item of
impeachment against Richard Nixon
putting bombs where nobody in Congress
or in the government has authorized you
to is basically equivalent to murder one
in a lot of people's books was the
fourth item of impeachment we learned in
May 73 when did we learn about the
unconstitutional and illegal wiretaps
which are still being litigated by one
Morton Halperin one of the tapis in
federal court we learned in May 73 when
do we learn about the CIA activities
against Chile we learned in September 74
when do we learn about the CIA in
domestic spying spying at home in
December 74 when did we learn about the
activities against Ellsberg at all and
the plumbers May June July of 73 after
what they're all after one important
date thereafter the 72 election so I
would say to you that my definition of
the press and more de gate is this if
the American press had been able to
penetrate any of the White House ongoing
operations and don't forget by 1971
Richard Nixon in acquiescent to a
break-in and Ellsberg's psychiatrists he
had put a hundred and ten thousand tons
of bombs on Cambodia over 14 months
without getting caught I mean God last
thing he was afraid of was us I would
say that if the press had somehow
managed to find one thing out in the
first term of what I call the foreign
policy watergate's Nixon Kissinger / /
Watergate
we might have had a couple of effects
one we might have kept Nixon from
himself if you've been caught out let's
say bombing Cambodia might have been
afraid to do the wiretapping have these
clowns go back in and try and beat up
people and go back into the wire there's
nutty stuff they were doing you might
have been hesitated twice my grounds
that maybe he could get caught two maybe
you know this isn't heavy Nixon save
himself for myself but it's possible the
second thing is the Democratic
nomination for sure if any of the thread
could have begun to have been unraveled
in 71 let's say if reporter could have
written about a hundred and ten thousand
tons of bombs it's almost amazing that
we did not we certainly had to see the
holes as they were all over the place
maybe the Democratic nomination would
have been a little tougher more hotly
contested maybe he wouldn't have been
left to George McGovern a decent but
certainly a sure loser maybe you would
had a more contested a more viable
Democrat inserting a more viable
candidates he's certainly a more viable
election process Nixon could have won
I'm not saying he Quinta but it
certainly would have been a lot tougher
than it was he swept everything if you
remember McGovern got into it is 1000%
for Tom Eagleton remember if you
remember some of that sort of what am I
saying I'm saying far the press far from
having a victory mortar game in which
everybody assumes that was exactly mine
exactly what happened my reading of the
history is simply this that we the press
by failing to meet any of the standards
that you might normally expect us to
have and hold in reporting on the Nixon
White House I think you could almost
argue helped make Watergate help create
it far from being the heroes of
Watergate we fell down so badly that we
made Nixon I guess we prevented Nixon
from from stopping himself a little bit
like people say Reagan should have been
himself and if if Jim Baker and the
others me sandy ever had been around
maybe Don Regan would have kept Reagan
from being himself I think the analogy
is very exact I guess the point is what
I'm saying is again is
what this whole story shows is that if
the president wants the lie and the
people want and round and want the lie
to us don't expect us in the press to
find out about it we can't if there's
going to be a a social revolution in the
United States don't expects us don't
expect us to lead it we won't even know
about it for six months is another way
of looking at it so it isn't going to be
in our bag we and the press can't help
you maybe you're not surprised maybe but
a lot of people are we can't do a thing
for you we can't do a single thing for
you about it and where are we gonna do
it what's gonna happen well I don't know
in this case in the case of this
government I think one of the things
that's gonna have to happen ultimately
is we're gonna have to have some
political leader with enough courage to
say that maybe our whole foreign policy
should not be structured and simply
unstopping the this Soviet style
communists that maybe that a foreign
policy that says it's okay to go into
Grenada because somebody was threatened
there and our students you know it's
okay to do it because the Grenadians the
Grenadians loved us for it they do they
were certainly feeling under the rest
the Canadian citizens thought it was
wonderful does that mean does that
justify what we do I would venture that
if we went into Chile and released the
people from Pinochet the despot who's
been ruling there he took over and said
I'm gonna stay in power 90 days it's
been a long 90 days is that our function
to do we have an obligation that a
design I don't think so and what does
the world think about a country that can
decide it can go into Grenada on for
purposes it believes to be just that our
national interest dictates that we this
country of 240 million can go knock off
a country of 110,000 what what can we
tell mr. Gaddafi the next time he
decides to go in the chat that you can't
operate in what you perceive to be your
best interests but we can do whatever we
want in our best interests that morality
is at the end of our guns and our tanks
and our fighters well I think that's
very short range and I don't think
there's anything we in the press can do
for you we cheerlead this stuff I guess
one answer is going to be maybe Congress
but you have to give Congress a d-minus
too in the last 20 30 years
everybody new in the Congress that mr.
William Casey of the CIA had two things
going for him basically he's probably 30
IQ points smarter than anybody else in
the government
and 30 times as devious everybody knew
he was selling him a bill of goods but
nobody had the guts to stand them up
nobody would take on the Reagan people
because Reagan was too popular we had
some amazing spectacle in the first term
of mr. Reagan we had a case in which
some of you might remember when the
Atlantic magazine published mr.
Stockman's Stockman of the of the office
of management of the budget directors a
sort of candid assessment bill greider
had a long piece in stock when December
1981 right at the time of the new budget
in which Grider which stock would
admitted that Donald Reagan's budget was
a fraud that his notion of cutting
deficits and reducing taxes than
spending more on defense simply was
impossible which since should have been
clear so the Congress was confronted an
early 82 with hearings on the new budget
that said of course we can increase
defense spending cut taxes and reduced
the budget the deficit Congress was
confronted with this budget this was the
White House was telling him they had
Stockman's testimony in the magazine
that it was a total fraud so how did it
what to do the answer was the call
Stockman and say to him is that right
and Stockman so it says no the
magazine's wrong Congress says Oh fine
and then proceeds to go through hearings
on that budget as if indeed that
magazine was wrong and Stockman is
simply misspoken to the reporter and
they marked up the budget as if nothing
Stockman said I false stock I fought the
but Congress as much as anybody by the
way it's interesting the Stockman wrote
a book that I recommend to all of you
Stockman's book tells you more about
wanto reagan than anything yet written
and of course he was treated as a pariah
the press joined in in trashing a
Stockman for being somebody who defected
and this message of the Stockwood book
was totally ignored the message being
that we had a presidency that was
operating on the 6:30 news and nothing
more well I'm not shy about my opinions
I do remember this is the live free and
die state I presume some of you are
really concerned about the importance of
stopping communism and we'll have a
conversation and I sort of like to get
into it I'm open for any question
on anything that you want to ask me
about my basic thesis is I guess to
conclude let me say something to you
that I'm a pessimist about the
presidency I don't think we're gonna see
any changes there's nobody in the
horizon that's gonna take treated any
differently whoever's gonna you know we
are Jekyll and Hyde you do understand
that when you know campaigning god knows
they come through here like crazy I
worked for when McCarthy was campaigning
for the presidency he was campaigning
against Lyndon Johnson I was expressed
secretary and speech writers in the New
Hampshire campaign of 68 I have a cold I
was a speechwriter and and press
secretary and and on the road with him
all the time spent a lot of time in New
Hampshire of course in which we did all
right in the write-in vote and one of
the things about it is that if gee whiz
let me tell you it's terrific fun even
if it's minus 12 in in Berlin Berlin
right you know you can go on downstairs
in the morning and some guys gotten up a
half an hour before you and the car is
gonna be 72 degrees and you're staying
at the ritz-carlton as much as possible
drinking seven dollar glasses of orange
juice and you want something it's
Learjets
even then and 68 it was all Learjets
private jets and this fancy person we
wish the paul newman used to travel with
us and stuff like that
very exciting wonderful time and so what
we have is a presidency we have the kind
of men who run for president who are the
kind of men who can say gee honey take
care of the kids tie those shoelaces
brush that teeth for the next you know
two two years I'm on the road it's its
total hell vir it's really rough I'll
see you and he can just walk out leave
them all without barely a backward
glance I mean let's face it when you do
when you're on the road you're on the
road you simply can't be a parent and a
husband when you're in a campaign is
they don't work it's impossible and so
the kind of guy has to be the kind of
narcissistic guy who could view his
importance to solving the world's
problems it's the way they view it as so
important that he's gonna walk away from
the family for a couple years not an
irrational trade-off for most people if
you have a chance to be president while
you do it but it does say something
about certain value
we had a case we're probably the
classiest candidate for the Democrats
Dale bumpers just said no there's too
many other things I value so the kind of
guy that does it
has the kind of narcissism and the kind
of notion that he can tell 240 million
people what to do and that's the kind of
way he looks at things and his values
are such that the value of worrying
about kids and schools and grades and
stuff like that aren't enough to keep
him there he's got to solve the world's
problems and so we get stunned when this
man once he gets elected of course one
of the things we do in our society is
he's our national leader and the first
lady is the first lady and their family
and they're we're all family oriented in
our society and we're just stunned when
we discover that our president hasn't
seen his grandchild for 18 months since
the grand channel has been born just
done and we're stunned when every one of
their children does nothing more than
write books ripping him off or give
speeches ripping him off we're just
stunned that the family is like this and
the answer of course is that's what you
get that's the kind of people you get
that's the craziness of our society you
get this sort of narcissism driven
people races a lot of profound questions
in my mind about what you're gonna vote
for what are we gonna vote for I guess
we're gonna have to look at since no
matter who you like President
immediately decides he's King he is
totally King none of the common or
ordinary visitors of life no longer have
much to do with him he's insulated from
any reality nothing but yes-man anybody
who's not a yes-man is out the door in
two minutes I don't know what you do how
do you do it I think the answer is when
I vote again assuming that the
candidates are similar in social issues
I'm not going to worry about the foreign
policy issue because I know they're
gonna be the same they've always been
the same they're gonna get in trouble
and kick the commies innovative country
if they have to you know if not
Nicaragua something else they look good
and get a lot of points in the press and
the press will go along with him totally
I guess I'm gonna look at the integrity
factor try and find somebody who I feel
has more integrity than the other guy
it's a crazy way to do it but that's
where I'm at and something may change
something may not we're still a
wonderful country we can exist despite
all these things but our national
leadership doesn't have the integrity
that any of you have in your family and
I think that's a
let's do some questions yes lah I'll
repeat him